okay
my name is roger galatis and i'm president of the
woodlands corporation i've been with the
woodlands corporation now since february 1979
and had an opportunity to participate in the
growth of the woodlands during that period of time
and also Prior to 1979, I lived in the local area,
worked for a competing real estate development
company whose name is Friendswood Development
Company, a subsidiary of Exxon, and had an
opportunity to watch the weapons grow from its
beginning and monitored and participated in that
growth through its 16-year history. history to
this point. The Woodlands is 16 years old October
19th. Everything you see here today and what you
will encounter has occurred in 16 years.
Remarkable. Now, in Friendswood, in terms of what
Friendswood was doing as compared to what
Woodlands... Well, Friendswood and all the
company is wholly owned subsidiary of Exxon
Corporation. And they have developed
large-scale communities in Houston, Clear Lake
City, which is where the NASA Space Center is
located. And actually, it was the first
large-scale plane community to be developed in
the Houston region. That started in the late 50s,
actually, and active development work in the
early and mid-60s. The second large community
that Princewood developed was a joint venture
with King Ranch. And it's called Kingwood, which
is located 25 miles to the east of the Woodlands.
Both of those very large scale, similar in nature
to the Woodlands in terms of scope and size and life
expectancy and those kinds of things. So I had some
reference to judge what was happening in the
Woodlands in the early days and to make the move to
the Woodlands when I first came in contact with
George Mitchell. And then when and how was that?
Well, I was happily working for Friendswood, and I
got a call one day from an executive search firm,
and the question was, would you like to join the
Woodlands development? And my first answer was,
no, I'm happy where I am. Well, that conversation
went on for a while. The short story is that after
several conversations, I elected to to join the
Woodlands, and that was in 1979. I've been here
continuously since that time. Have you contacted
George Mitchell, had conversations with him
before that decision, personally? I knew George
Mitchell by reputation, not personally, and I
knew the Woodlands by observation, and I knew a
number of the people who lived and worked in the
Woodlands. I had some knowledge of what was
happening, but no personal knowledge of Mr.
Mitchell and his a visionary approach and
enthusiasm for doing things in a visionary way. So
that's not what brought you into this firm? No, it
was not that per se. I guess one of the things that
was intriguing about coming to the Woodlands was
the fact that it was in Montgomery County, the
county where I established home, a place I wanted
to remain probably for the rest of my life. It was at
the stage of development where a lot of potential
existed for the future, and I thought the timing
was good to make that move. Did you move in as
president? Yeah, president. No. Originally, I
came to the Woodlands and was responsible for the
residential part of the development here, the
residential community, which includes all the
infrastructure and support structures and
support structure for the residents who live
here, including schools and churches and that
kind of infrastructure. I originally became his
senior vice president of residential
development. Later became executive vice
president of the company, and then in 1986 became
president
of the company. You know George Mitchell now. Very
well. Yeah, I would imagine so. You must have a feel
for what it is he wanted
you to do. As you got promoted through the company,
you must have a sense of, I don't want to call it an
agenda, but he obviously had certain things that
he had you in mind to do. Well, George is a person who
has a great vision for the future. And sometimes it
takes lesser men a longer period of time to
understand what that vision is. But George's
enthusiasm never wanes. George never loses a
battle. Maybe he's not yet won it, but he's never
lost it. And the former chancellor at Texas A&M,
I'm not sure if that's the right word. I'm not sure
if that's the right word. I'm not sure if that's the
right word. I'm not sure if that's the right word.
I'm not sure if that's the right word. today are
already solved. They may not like the solution,
but nonetheless, they're solved. And he's
thinking about 30 years down the road. And that
describes Georgia about as well as any attempt to
describe Georgia I've heard. And it's impressed
me since I've heard Frank make that statement.
I made a talk one time, and I said working for George
Mitchell is fairly simple. What you need to do is do
it with integrity, do it with quality, make sure
you save the trees and natural vegetation, and do
it right now. If you do those things, you're in
pretty good shape with George. I think that's a
consistent formula. I would guess you... George
is not inconsistent. George is very consistent in
his approach. One of the things George does and
insists that this company do, and I think it's a
tribute to him that's comfortable for us, is we put
a lot back into this community. We expect to make a
profit. We're in the business to make a profit. But
there are many things that we do as a development
company that puts value back into the community
that has long-lasting effects and will have
long-lasting effects on this community for years
and years to come. but maybe a typical developer in
other places might not do. For example, there's a
program of art in public places, and as you drive
through the community, you will see major works of
art that's been installed in public esplanades or
in your building. I think we have about 13 pieces of
major artwork now that have been funded both by the
development company and by other companies who
bought land from us and built buildings. We set
aside a portion of our land sales revenue and a
portion of the cost of constructing the building
into an art fund. And that fund is used to not only
acquire art pieces, but also to maintain those
that have been acquired over time. We also just
finished building and developing the Cynthia
Woods Natural Center for Performing Arts in the
Woodlands, which is about a $10 million
contribution that obviously is going to add value
to the community. add value to the remaining lands
we have to develop and sell. But it's something
that didn't have to be done. It's something George
wanted to do. He felt very strongly that it needs to
be a regional asset for the city of Houston as well
as the woodlands in Montgomery County. And this
past year we had probably, in its first year of
operations, 30 different performances there
that include the ballet, the symphony,
contemporary music, country music, a whole array
of programs, and more than 200,000 people came to
attend those 20 to 30 performances,
an average of 6,000 people for each performance.
What was your vision for the women when you joined
this company? Did you see it as something really
different from what you've been doing? Well, the
Woodlands is probably more comprehensive than
most other large-scale communities in the
Houston region and is as comprehensive as any in
the country. There are only five, six, maybe 10
places in the country where a community like this
is being developed in a comprehensive nature. So
it's a unique employment opportunity. It gives
you national exposure. international
recognition not not just as an individual but the
community and the quality of what's being done
here is recognized as being quality one thing i see
during here in the traditional review community
concept is in fact this idea of the economic
community yeah and i sense that maybe this is one of
your special for us well explain how that's being
developed early on we we We recognized clearly we
were not just in the real estate development
business, but we had to be in the economic
development business if we were to succeed,
which is different from some other large-scale
communities. We started out, in fact, with a large
residential component, a recreational
component. But simultaneously with that, we set
about the mission of developing jobs in the local
community. When did that come along? Was that
already part of the program when you came in? Yeah,
it was in the fledgling stage. We've expanded it
over the 12 years I've been here. But that was part
of the mission. Our goal and objective is to create
jobs along with housing and residential
population. Right now we have close to 8,000
permanent jobs in the Woodlands. The original
objective was to have one job for every household
in the Woodlands. Today we have about 11,500
households and 8,000 jobs. But we also have about
2,000 retirement units in the Woodlands. So if you
take those out of the workforce, we're pretty
close to imbalance. And I think the very
impressive thing about that is we've been able to
create those jobs during a period of time when
Houston lost 200,000 jobs in its economy. Let's
talk about the 1980s now. Okay, the 1980s. You're
here in 1979, you're here, and the economy is just
about to go into a... Well, starting in 1980, late
in 79, through 1982, the Houston economy, the
Texas economy, was very robust.
Frankly, I guess we went through a period of
arrogance in Texas, and developed a reputation
which was deserved but not very pleasing in other
parts of the country. The price of oil was
escalating and energy was keying. Jobs were being
created in the Houston economy at the rate of
65,000, 70,000 jobs a year. The population was
growing at 90,000 a year. Tremendous need for
housing, tremendous need for office buildings,
tremendous need for shopping and support
services. And frankly, a lot of things could be
built without much thought given the quality of
life and those kinds of things. And then in 1982,
when the first decline in oil prices became
apparent, some of that robust nature of the
economy started drifting away. And by 1986,
things were really pretty bad in the Houston
economy as well as throughout the state of Texas.
And it became quite apparent that if we were going
to compete on a national scale and attract
businesses into the Houston region and diversify
our economy and get away from being 80% dependent
on energy and try to bring in companies like Compaq
Computer and biotechnology firms and things that
would give us a broader economic base, we were
going to have to pay attention as a city, as a
region. We were going to have to pay attention to
the quality of life issues. And that really played
into the hands of the Woodlands very nicely,
because from the outset, we were, our mission was
to deal with quality of life. And back in 1982, we
sold in the Woodlands, if I recall, as one measure
of activity, I think we sold 1000 new homes that
year. But we only had 2.8% of the housing market in
Houston. In the downturn in 1987-88,
which was about the bottom of it. We were selling
maybe 500 homes in Houston, but we had captured
maybe 10% or 11% of the total market. So while
absolute numbers had declined, our market share
had grown tremendously. And today, the five
large-scale communities in Houston capture
about 40% of the housing market in Houston, which
says that in five locations, almost one out of
every two new home sales made in Houston in those
five locations and those five locations while
they differ in scope and size and somewhat in
approach they do address quality of life issues
and i think the lack of zoning in houston and the
ability of these large-scale communities to
through restrictive covenants in in effect
establishes the zoning so that people would know
where the shopping centers are going to be and the
apartments are going to be and the single-family
housing are going to be coupled with the mission of
creating jobs in the local community and
enhancing the mobility to get from this location
to other job locations for those who did not work
here, greatly enhanced the position of the
woodlands and the other large-scale communities
in the Houston region. Let me interrupt for a
second and ask a question. You mentioned that in
the downturn, I don't want to put words in your
mouth, but what I'm hearing you say is that the
Woodlands was appropriately positioned to take
advantage of quality of life issues. The quality
of life issue has been something from the
inception. That's right. We've heard. Right. Did
you, at the same time, though, I mean, was this a
passive thing? Did you just reap a benefit, or in
fact, was there some sort of marketing effort,
aggressive or low-key, to go out and sell the
concept of the Woodlands to other parts of the
country? No. We aggressively marketed the
product that we were building. And we were able to
more clearly focus on the quality of life issues in
that marketing approach. And we did things beyond
marketing. Marketing is sort of an
all-encompassing word. It includes selling. It
includes advertising. But it also includes
building a product. And I think we were building
the product was the main thing. We have planted the
seed that led toward the development of the
hospital in the Woodlands, which provided a
delivery for health services in this local
community and in this region surrounding the
Woodlands. We also followed that same model and
have assisted in the development of a private
college preparatory school here in the Woodlands
called the John Cooper School. We donated land.
guaranteed some of the financing for the first
building to be constructed. We helped recruit the
faculty and helped identify key board members to
serve on a nonprofit corporation that owns it.
Now, that does a couple of things for you. One, it
expresses clearly your involvement in quality of
life issues and your concern for education, the
elevation of the educational standards. But in
addition to that, it helps you to attract
businesses here particularly in the high-tech
area, in the biotechnology and the medical field,
which we actively pursued through the
involvement of the Texas Medical Center, because
those people are interested in quality education
for their children, and they're more likely to
live in an environment where that educational
opportunity is available, where quality housing
is available, a broad cross-section of housing
opportunities are here, and medical services are
available. But you have gotten cooperation and
support from the Texas Medical Center, not
competition in terms of that. Well, Texas
Medical, institutions in the Texas Medical
Center is separate and apart from the Texas
Medical Center, which is a nonprofit corporation
itself. We've dealt with Baylor College of
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science
Center, now MD Anderson. And all of those have a
presence here in the Woodlands. an interesting
thing that happened in this diversification
effort in texas in the houston region before the
downturn occurred the texas medical center
engaged in tremendous research programs they
wrote about those research programs published it
in the england journal of medicine and other
companies uh pharmaceutical companies in other
parts of the country and overseas Europe and Japan
particularly, took those academic findings and
converted that to a product or a process that
created commercial growth. And George Mitchell
had the notion that that could happen right here in
Houston, Texas, and more particularly here in the
Woodlands. And he formed a venture capital
company to help medical schools fund startup
companies so that they could develop and benefit
from their academic work in a commercial field.
And that benefited the Woodlands because we could
build buildings to house that activity. The
scientists would live here in the Woodlands and
they would buy homes here. So it was, I think, a very
good marriage that once again came out of the
position of George Mitchell and his willingness
to invest funds to make it happen. Did this
basically start with a hospital and then started
to expand? No, the hospital came along. The
hospital actually was a separate initiative, not
directly tied to the medical research in the
medical center. It was tied to the clinical
aspects of the medical center. And it was needed
actually to help deliver it. In the early days,
1975, 76, 77, a group of people in the Woodlands
came together, and this is what's nice about the
Woodlands. The developer doesn't have to do
everything here. It's the quality people who come
in and make this a very special place. Given the
chance, they'll solve a lot of their own problems
and give them some initiatives and
encouragement. But a group of people came
together and formed something called the
Woodlands Medical Center, Inc. And they had this
question, how do we provide medical services for a
growing community that one day will be 150,000
people? And it started out with the vision of
having a clinic with two beds in it so that you could
have outpatient services. And that notion grew
into a 100-bed hospital before it was
constructed. But this was outside the framework
of the Women's Corporation. Well, we were deeply
involved in it. We were involved in it. I spent
eight years of my life working on it. But that was
the facility that really took the initiative. We
had a nonprofit corporation with a board of
directors comprised of people who lived in this
community and also some people who were
associated with Baylor College of Medicine and
Methodist Hospital. And through that nucleus of
people and some funding on our behalf and some
planning that we put into it, we now have a hundred
bed hospital operating here. It's a non-profit
corporation. And that same model was used to
develop the private school. Okay, so that's sort
of a style of management, isn't it? Right. Right.
And that evolved, you know, you learn as you go
along. One other significant element that has
occurred here that involves Texas A&M in the
University of Texas, University of Houston, was
the formation of the, then the Houston Area
Research Center, which modified its name to the
Houston Advanced Research Center, still using
the acronym HART. But that's modeled after the
research triangle in North Carolina. When And
North Carolina looked at itself and its economic
futures. Back in the 60s, they tried to assess what
their strengths were. And the tobacco industry
was going down, agriculture was going down. But
they had a strong involvement of academic
institutions and a need for research. So they
formed this 5,000-acre block of land called the
Research Triangle. It is a triangle, actually,
between the University of North Carolina and the
North Carolina State and Duke. And they formed
something very similar to HART, which is the
Research Triangle Institute. And it was the
nucleus that has led to the development of more
than 30,000 jobs in that location now. And the
world-renowned for its research activities and
high-tech manufacturing there. facilities i
guess ibm is the largest singular employer there
what was the initiative behind the park were you
involved in that yeah i was involved in it on the
periphery george mitchell once again had the
notion that had the bulldog determination to make
it work willing to put some of his personal funds
into it to make it work the company donated agreed
to donate 100 acres of land for our campus upon
which it would be built and provided some of the
initial funding for the first several buildings
that were built and now it once again is a
freestanding non-profit corporation not under
the control and direction anyway of the woodlands
corporation but it is here in the woodland and it
does things that benefits the community do you
have a sense it sounds to me like what you're saying
is the strategic planning occurs in the head of
your commission well a lot of the initiative comes
from that we've We try to put it into a strategic
plan that can be implemented. But he's a part of a
lot of the vision that has gone into this place. Do
you have a sense or an opinion of the beauty of what
you've described is the
plan already existed. It becomes more important
because of some economic turmoil in Texas. The
notion to diversify the Houston economy, of
course, is also going to benefit the woodlands
tremendously. And these other policies that have
developed, such as the attempt to get a portion of
the University of Houston campus here, the HART,
all these other kind of things, all feed into the
same goal. I guess what I'd like to know is, or it
would be interesting to ascertain your sense of of
how you fit into that strategic planning matrix.
You're involved also in policies. What we're
trying to do is, as we interview people, identify
what's the contribution of this individual
toward for the whole that is becoming the
woodlands. And for all time and eternity,
someone's going to say, you know, Roger Galatis
did A, B, C. Where do you fit? Well, I guess I would
have to say that I'm deeply involved in the overall
planning and development process. as it relates
to the day-to-day functions that take place in
this community. I have a deep involvement
personally with people in the community. This
community is not going to be any stronger than the
fabric that holds it together. And I guess if I have
a sense of mission myself, it's to make sure that
the institutions that are put in place fit into the
overall strategy of what's being accomplished
here in the woodlands. We work closely with
churches. We work closely with community groups.
We work closely with the schools. We work closely
with things like the Lions Club and their
fundraising activities. We work closely with the
YMCA. I was personally involved in helping bring
the YMCA, a regional YMCA, into the Woodlands. I
serve on the board of the private school and the
board of the hospital, and I guess My function is to
make sure this grand strategy is implemented in a
timely and effective way. I would like to think I
add something to that vision, but when placed
against Mr. Mitchell's vision, I guess few of us
here would reach to those great heights. I say
that. But you implement. Yeah, and there are a lot
of us implementing. I'm not sure. George's
visions, I don't mind saying this on tape, and I
don't mind you writing it down so George can hear
it, but I only wish I was doing about 20% of the
things that George Mitchell thinks I'm doing.
He's a very stimulating individual, and he has
a...
He says if you're not working on five or six things
at one time, you're not being productive. And we
all have... It's a challenge to accomplish all the
things that George would like to have
accomplished in the timeframe that he thinks
would be appropriate and suitable. But he also is a
very understanding individual,
and he's compassionate,
sometimes not understood by everyone that comes
in contact with him initially, because he is
thinking about the future. And so many of us are
focused on today's problem. When you see these
things, such as the medical park, I guess, and the
research park, and the Cooper School, are you
essentially putting a ship out at sea to see what's
going to happen, I guess? No, I think we have a
rudder on the ship. I think we have a sense of
direction. And sometimes when we start, though,
we don't know exactly how we're going to get there.
exactly what form it's going to take. I don't think
that's necessarily a condemnation of the
management of this place. Sometimes you just
don't have all the answers. You don't know where
you'd like to get to, what you'd like the mission to
be, what you'd like to accomplish, but you're
really not sure how you're going to get there, how
it's all going to be funded. I think if you took time
to understand all that, you may not get there. Is
that, in fact, the uniqueness of the woodlands?
You mentioned Kingwood, which is a completely
different type of community. I mean, it's a nice
community, but it's a completely different.
Yeah, I worked there for a long time. Yeah, but the
orientation of just driving through the place,
it's totally different. Is the uniqueness of the
woodlands this emphasis on infrastructure, what
you're talking about? Is that really what sets it
apart from? Well, I think there's several things
it sets it apart. One, I can kind of list them in.
This is not saying we're better or they're better,
but it's an observation of differences. One, we
work much more diligently to preserve the natural
environment, natural vegetation. You drive into
the woodlands and you don't see 30,000 people. You
don't see 5,000 square feet of non-residential
space. You don't see 12,000 homes. You don't see a
conference center. And to the people who live
here, they really like that. To some people who see
it for the first time, they don't understand it,
and it's not traditional. It's a marketing
challenge, frankly, because people, when
they're moving into the Houston region, they like
things that they have seen in other places and they
relate to them. But if we can get a shot at them and
talk to them for a while and let them talk to people
who live here, they will understand that this
natural environment and natural vegetation is
really dysfunctional. It serves to eliminate the
stormwater runoff. It forms more water. When you
urbanize a place, you're not creating flooding on
your neighbors adjacent to you. It provides a
buffer for sound, a visual buffer. It provides an
environment for sustaining wildlife. Just down
the street there's a bank building, and between
here and the bank building, It's not uncommon to
see deer crossing the road, and it's in a fairly
populated area, but the wildlife still is evident
here, and it will continue to be that. Twenty-five
percent of the land is being set aside as permanent
open space as far as the development plan.
Twenty-five percent? Twenty-five percent.
Another thing that is different here as compared
to other places is when you drive in, you don't see
the typical grocery store on the right and the
service station on the left, you have to drive back
into the community to village centers to find
shopping and retail facilities. Actually, it's
located convenient to where people live. You just
don't drive past it coming in and leaving. Another
thing that is, I think, strikingly different is
the an intensive effort to create economic growth
within the community and not be just a residential
commuter community, but to give us people an
opportunity to live and work in the same
environment without the necessity to get in an
automobile and drive as great distances as they
were. I guess those are three things that I would
say are different. And the scope of the wooded is
different. The size is 25,000 acres. Sheenwood is
14,000 acres. The Woodlands is the largest single
land mass, I think, in the world.
Church, you also mentioned the churches. Wasn't
there a concerted effort by the Woodlands
Corporation to, in fact, incorporate, invite, in
fact, sustain religious and social and, again,
these quality of life? Yeah. In the early days,
there was created something called interfaith.
And interfaith is not a communicable movement to
do away with individual denominations at all. In
Columbia, Maryland, that was attempted, and it
failed. There was only one church. When you start
dealing with the religious community and then
doing away with the denominations, you're
treading on thin ice. But here, the Interfaith was
an umbrella organization that helped fledgling
churches find a site in the woodlands, We helped
them build a building which served as a place for a
congregation to meet and to like afford to build a
building. It sort of coordinated the early
religious activity with each religious
denomination keeping their own identity intact.
And that organization still exists. It operates a
daycare center. It has an outreach program for
senior citizens. It does a lot of charitable
things in addition to coordinating activities
for churches. But right now, I think there are 19
church buildings in the Woodlands that have been
built, and some 23 congregations, two or three
have not yet built their own sanctuary. See, I
think that's significant. How do you make money
off of churches? Well, you don't. You don't,
that's right. But it helps develop a fabric in the
community. That's right, that's right. And
another thing we've done here, and I'm proud of
this, I've been involved in this from the outset,
we have had an ongoing program to provide housing
for senior citizens. And it takes various forms.
One, we have subsidized housing for seniors who
cannot afford to rent apartments. So we have some
600, 700 rental apartments that is subsidized.
And that's a negative word in a lot of places,
subsidized housing. And you think how
detrimental that would be to other property
sizes. But in fact, it has not been here. But senior
citizens live in rental apartments. We have a
congregate care facility with 300 units in that
where people need some assistance in living, but
not at the level of a nursing home. But we do have a
nursing home here, too. And we have four
generations of families living in the Woodlands
today, and we're only 16 years old. And it's worked
this way. First, young couple comes to buy a home
they've been transferred here from ohio and they
have a couple of young children so that's that's
two generations there when their parents retire
in ohio instead of moving to florida and not
knowing you know in the sun city where you don't
know anybody except other people who retired they
have elected to come and live close to their
children that's really happening and even the
great-grandparents have come and their housing
opportunities throughout the woodlands for
those four generations. Not all retirees live in
subsidized housing. Some choose to live by their
own home and live independently, just as you and I
would do that. But there's been this concerted
effort to create the extended family in reverse.
After World War II, families were scattered
across the United States. grandparents stayed
back at home and the kids left and they formed their
home in another city. Kids didn't get to grow up
with their grandparents. I think something
happened to society during those years in the 50s
and 60s. Here in the Woodlands, I'm pleased that
we're part of bringing some families back
together. True, it's an economic opportunity for
us, but also it's a strengthening their family
ties. Is this basically the essence of your
demographic plan, I guess, that it's a
family-oriented community? Well, it's family.
We have a fairly good number of singles that live
here. I think 40% of the families who live here have
no children. And that's a national trend across
this country. Families are waiting later to have
children. Some have none at all. But There are also
very strong family ties that exist in the
community, too. What about an economic spectrum
of society? Trying to provide something for
everyone. Yeah, as I say, we have subsidized
housing for the elderly. We have subsidized
housing for families or individuals who don't
qualify for it. I guess in total there are 1,500
subsidized units in the woods or something like
that. We have more subsidized housing in the
Woodlands than any other community in Houston
that is a planned community. Is it subsidized only
for the elderly? No, some for families,
low-income families, low- and moderate-income
families. And that's to get a mix? Yeah. The social
scheme of planning was to provide a broad
cross-section of housing opportunities
for a heterogeneous population. That's got to fit
the new community. Yeah, well, that was part of the
new community program that was conceived by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Affairs,
which failed miserably. This is the only
community out of 13 that was formed under that
Title VII new community program that came about in
1971 that succeeded, that did not go into
foreclosure. There are several that are still
active, but it was after they went into
foreclosure and they did not pay the on
indebtedness that they were obligated to pay. But
this one succeeded, and it succeeded, I think, for
some very valid, basic reasons. One, it was
adjacent to a growing metropolitan area. It was on
a major interstate highway that led into the
business district, and we were not too far removed
from that. We were close to an international
airport. There was good transportation, there
were jobs existing in the local area, and the ones
who failed didn't meet those criteria. It was a
social experiment with the notion that if you
started a new city out in an isolated part of the
world, people would transfer from the inner city
and all those problems they had would go away and
they would start life anew and things would be
wonderful and great. But it doesn't work that way.
People who move into this community bring the
problems with them that they have. I think the
environment helps them deal with those problems,
perhaps, and cope with them. But it certainly
doesn't do away with them. By having a good school
system, and we do have a good public school system,
I mentioned private schools, And that didn't come
about out of dissatisfaction with the public
schools. It's just a supplement to the public
schools. But by having a good school system, this
growing family relationship, jobs in the local
area, I think a good array of recreational
opportunities that kids can use as well as adults,
the involvement of churches in the community, and
the establishment of traditional institutions
the YMCA, the YWCA, the Kiwanis Club, the Lions
Club, the Rotary Club. All of those kind of things
have come together in a very nice way here in the
Woodlands. Let me ask you one other question.
You piqued my curiosity. I've heard four times
now, and it's all exactly the same. One of the
reasons why the Woodlands succeeded with us
together is because it's close to a major
metropolitan area. It's on the interstate. It's
next to the airport. Did that come out of... an
in-house study? Was there an independent study?
Because everyone we've talked to says the same
thing. Well, maybe we were lucky we bought the land
in the right place. George Mitchell, once again,
in an attempt to diversify his own company, which
was predominantly oil and gas, and still is
largely oil and gas, saw the growing north side of
Houston as a as a real estate development
opportunity and he started acquiring lands here
in the early 60s through the mid-60s and there were
a number of large timber companies that owned
sizable tracts of land and taxes and other reasons
made it non-productive for timber use and george
bought a lot of land for a very reasonable price and
i don't think George may disagree with it, but I
don't think George knew exactly what he was going
to do when he was buying it. He had not formulated
all the plans, but he knew that the north side of
Houston was intercontinental airport,
interstate highway to Dallas, the wooded
environment, the low cost of land at that time, the
growth of Houston. All of those were ingredients
that would lead toward a successful real estate
development, which at that time was not I don't
think totally defined. It evolved over a series of
years of planning. Did he say that? No, that he
bought the land. In fact, some of it he just bought,
actually, thinking he couldn't lose because he
could cut the timber off it and come out ahead. In
fact, he said that. I think this thing has George's
enthusiasm and vision has led the way, but He's
attracted some good people to come help him think
through the process, too, in the early days. But
one thing that's interesting to me, it does seem
that you have a style of management here that I
haven't seen in too many places. I teach business
and economic history. But what you're doing is
creating these little autonomous divisions here
that are really not controlled by you, that you're
involved with. I'm not sure what management style
that is. Decentralization and diversification
or something like that, but it seems to work.
Actually, developing... communities takes a
management style which you probably don't find in
other places. You're involved in this thing 24
hours a day, seven days a week, and you're involved
with people who are your neighbors, and that's
another point I want to make. I think one thing
that's made us successful in dealing with the
community is we're not absentee developers. Most
of our employees live right here in the woodland,
and we see our neighbors, and we see them in the
grocery store, and we see them at functions, and So
when a problem develops, they're dealing with
somebody they know. And it's on a different level
than if it's a big developer in another city that is
controlling this place and controlling my life.
Now, that's not to say that there are not some
problems that develop in caves in our community.
There are things that some people in the community
want that we can't provide, can't provide in the
way that they perceive to be timely. There are some
people that even say they've been deceived and
misled. I would debate that with them, but
nonetheless, if they feel that way, they feel that
way. But that's a very small minority of people.
And I'm pleased at the good relationship we have in
this community. I live here, have a phone number
and a telephone book, and don't feel
uncomfortable at all in going wherever I go. And
really am not... not uh put in any awkward
positions uh because they're the corporations
yeah right and i think uh other people who live here
and work here have that same same experience since
being president of the company in 1986 what would
have been your primary preoccupation well you
know in 1986 the economy of houston was at its
lowest ever in at least in my memory. So the
challenge of continuing to develop and maintain
this community at a profitable level was
certainly a challenge. We had to trim our
workforce. We had to cut back our capital budgets.
We had to do things that other companies did, and
frankly, some of that was not very pleasant on a
personal level. But we did it, and we survived.
What about your relationship with the builders,
for example? Oh, they're good. Periodic. They're
very good. Builders like building in the
woodlands. We have about 20 home builders that
purchase lots from us and build homes. We help some
of them market their homes and some sell their own.
But they like working in an environment like the
woodlands because we're not incorporated, so we
don't have an inspection system imposed upon us by
a city. But we have established architectural
controls, building standards, and put in effect
an inspection program of our own so that every
builder has to meet certain quality standards.
And they like that because no one takes advantage
of the system. They're all on a level playing
field. And so they can build to those quality
standards and know that somebody else is not
undercutting their marketing by building a
second quality second tier quality of housing.
Does the Woodlands Corporation have its own
building inspectors? Yes, we do. We employ those.
We have building inspectors. We have one person
who does nothing but inspect the clearing of
building sites to make sure that they're not
over-cleared during the construction process.
You can look at the buildings here, and you see it's
only cleared five or ten feet away from the
construction of that building. And that's not by
accident. You really have to work at that. The
temptation or tendency of builders, let's get all
the trees out of the way so we can build a house.
Maybe we'll plant some trees after we get there.